Cardiff Carnal Anniversary Project.
Interviewee, Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee, Becky Holmes.
Location, we're in the SWCCA office.
And today's date is the 7th of October, 2015.
Before we start, in earnest, Becky,
would you be kind enough to spell your name in full, please?
Yeah, of course.
B-E-C-C-I-H-O-L-M-E-S.
Thank you very much.
Becky, when did you first hear of or get involved with Cardiff Carnival?
So that was back in 2008.
I'd just finished my degree in fine art, feeling a bit lost.
And I knew I wanted to do something in the community arts.
And I think I found SWCCA online.
So I contacted Steve and met up with him and said that I wanted to do some voluntary work for three weeks.
So that was in Butetown Pavilion, I think.
So today, I think about three or four days a week, because I was working part time at the time.
And it was absolutely amazing.
I learned so many things.
It was incredible.
I, to be honest, I wish I could work this full three weeks, but, yeah, it's fantastic.
Such a good community of people and amazing artists.
Just a really big community feel.
And, yeah, amazing.
So there we are down the BYP, as we called it, in Butetown Youth Pavilion.
And it's 2008.
Can you recall any of the costumes that you worked on or anything?
Yeah, I mean, obviously, sometimes you're working in a production line, aren't you?
Yeah. And at other times, you're working on big single constructions.
I'd imagine you were obviously you were thrown in a deep end, because that's a great SWCCA tradition.
You know?
Yeah, can you recall any, is there a costume or something that you recall from that very first camp
other than just the sheer mayhem of it?
Yeah, well, I remember like starting off like doing basic jobs,
like spraying up fabric onto foam, things like that.
And then one of the guys actually let me loose on a backpack.
He was a bit nervous about it.
But it's a big honour indeed, isn't it?
Yeah. Yeah, that was really fun.
But then towards the end, we ended up making our own costumes, who made these
paper mache toadstools, which we carried.
And we were like little elves, I suppose, sat on toadstools when we sat down.
So we sat down, looked like we were sat on a toadstool and we had a paper mache one.
So we actually wore those in the parade.
There was me, Loren and Hannah. We were all volunteering.
And it was, yeah, I didn't know I was actually going to be in the parade.
It was actually amazing.
So when you first actually volunteered, you obviously knew you were going to be helping
and doing all these things, but you didn't envisage yourself in costume
in the final parade back in 2008.
I was really scared, but it was really fun.
Yes. Yes.
I get a bit jealous now seeing people in costumes.
I know exactly how you feel.
People often ask me, why aren't you in costume?
And the answer is because in the very first one ever in 1990,
I was in costume and got into a major altercation with a policeman
and couldn't get past first barrier because he hadn't been to any of the briefings.
But I was, in fact, the organiser and he was having that a bit
and totally destroyed all the plans we'd made with the police.
But I am the organiser.
It's like, so, you know, it was a yellow bib for me from then on, you know,
at least it was quite plain who was taking legal responsibility for it all.
So 2008, we're in the BYP.
Where do we go from there? What's your next step in your carnival journey?
So I wasn't around then, 2009, not sure what I was doing.
I think I was just doing more volunteering in other places.
And then it was 2010 then, I think you contact me to be on the team,
which was like amazing.
So I just decided to go self employed that year.
And in the arts. So, yeah, I was really excited.
So, yes, 2010, we were still in.
No, I think we were in.
We moved to Channel View, Channel View, the centre in Grangetown.
Yeah, so no natural daylight for you for three weeks.
It was, wasn't it?
I mean, yeah, since we moved to Fitzhalla, I mean, I said, well, it's natural daylight.
It's quite good for human beings.
Apparently, it's good for plants as well.
So 2010, we're in a big, big
fluorescent lighted sports hall effectively, isn't it?
It's two basketball courts or three badminton courts, you know,
all under the same roof.
And speaking of I'm hearing impaired, as you know, I'm deaf in one ear.
But yes, what was it like, you know, so you go in
and the joy was there in the environment, but but quite hard working conditions or not.
Or you just thought like after a while, you just get a new to it
and you get stuck in.
I got on with it in the end.
But when you first walk in, it's just really orange.
You have to take the fabric outside, especially like the reds and yellows,
because you can actually tell what colour they were.
We like to reduce colour vibrancy in our artists.
It makes everything a bit more random.
And when you go out for dinner, then it's just like, wow, really bright out here
and go back in, back to the orange.
But no, it was quite echoey in there, but a really big
it was a good space.
We were lucky, I think.
Yes, I think we were able to fence off part of it.
Yeah, and put the costumes up onto the ceiling with ropes.
Yes, yes.
So we do need lots of room, you're quite right.
And flying costumes to get them out of the way.
And then there's something wonderful about it.
The same sort of, I don't know,
some Victorian about the big lowered, lowered back down again to be worked on.
It's Heath Robinson, isn't it?
Where's my costume?
That'll be about 20 foot above your head, mate.
Oh, that's lower down.
So it's rather sweet.
Can you remember what?
I mean, because now you're very much,
you know, moved from the volunteer right the way through to being
carnival artist.
What designs did particularly come to mind from 2010?
I don't think I was in charge of designing then.
Right. Oh, right.
I was I remember making a backpack on my own
and Adrian was like really impressed.
I was really chuffed.
I think I covered like a moon backpack,
like the help them with a fire costume, I think.
You had a big fire backpack and a section to go with some of those.
But yeah, it just got better and better.
I had more responsibility.
Yes. More trust.
No, absolutely.
I mean, Batman's got his utility belt.
And of course, carnival artists like yourself have got for three weeks
your your your tool belts.
Yeah, you know, it's there.
You're clad in this thing.
It's got everything hanging off it.
You know, you could I'm sure you could ask for the fibula, right?
I certainly passed it over.
Couldn't live without it.
Absolutely.
And did that mean because, of course, by this time,
you're a full time artist and tutor and helping everybody
come together creatively.
Were you able to be in a costume in 2010 or not?
So were you running the line?
Yeah, running the line.
I had a head dress I'd made like last minute at home.
Yeah.
Isn't that strange phenomena that you can actually facilitate
hundreds of people and then suddenly realize the night before.
Well, what am I going to look like?
Hang on. Yes, I've got to be a work mode.
And yes, you know, you said you're running the line.
You're responsible for a whole numbers of sections and seeing
what that they're happy, that they look good.
The costumes are optimal.
That whole process of getting ready on the day,
I have to say, is one of my favorite parts of the whole project,
because it's it's not chaotically organized,
but it is organized chaos.
There's a yeah, the clock is ticking.
What's it what's it like from your side of the fence?
I'm you know, I just think you're like, yeah, I have the blister
and that the roads got closed and the rest of it.
And yeah, every time you dip back into there, there's a
I don't know, there's a rising tide of panic
plus joy as it feels.
Yeah, well, sorry, I don't put words in your mouth.
I'm happy. And it's like the calm before the storm.
You just like, oh, it's quite calm.
Like little boxes out.
Yeah, we've got everything sorted and then people start arriving.
Yes, they pull them into their costumes.
And then just I remember that year I did face painting and it was
it was pretty stressful.
I remember we had to still face painting and you were like, come on,
we've got a liner.
So we had to like put them all away.
But people like really want their face painted.
So they kind of do it quickly, make it look good.
But no, it's such a buzz.
Everyone's just looking really proud and really happy.
The only thing I can say in my defense is one of the many, many things.
So it's organizational rather than creative.
But, you know, not merely kind of carnival, but hundreds of parades
over the year, many lantern parades, et cetera.
Not on one instance has Swicker and the community not been ready
to start its parade exactly on the time of greed and public size.
And that's that, you know, and believe me, and that isn't the case
for a lot of community events.
They don't have a list described and the rest of it.
But when you're closing bones and it seemed to me and we took that with us.
It's like if we agree to that,
we agree to that and that's how it's going to happen.
And I think that, yeah.
So sorry for those who have been away in the face space.
I can actually. It has to be done.
It has to be done. No, no, no.
Yeah. Believe me.
It was my first year.
So you just think you've got all the time in the world.
And then, oh, no, that last hour disappears into it.
I mean, you know, you must have a million questions asked of you.
Whereas, of course, most people ask me questions.
I'll just go and say, go and see Becky.
Go see Amy or whatever.
Yeah. Do I have to go out and take me?
I mean, sorry. It's not.
Yeah. Not so much as a pair of scissors.
You know.
But I know some lovely people who have.
Yeah. Absolutely.
So after 2010, where do we go next?
So 2011, so that was still at the BYP, I think.
At Channel View. Channel View.
So yeah, yeah.
Still in the orange room.
Yeah. Still amazing.
And I suppose more responsibility.
I think I got given quite a few groups who came in,
like youth groups and stuff to work with, which is really rewarded and fun.
Did you work with groups with special needs?
Because, I mean, we've always tried to be inclusive and some groups are integrated.
Others are just private individuals and their friends.
There's quite a few individuals.
I'm not sure if I'm meant to mention names, so I won't.
But yeah, coming in, I'd end up working with them one on one.
I got on really well with them and they come back every year and work together.
Yes.
And work with a lot of bigger groups as the years have gone on.
I've I really enjoy working with them.
Really nice people.
And they get so much out of it.
It's incredible. Yeah.
It's got to be good.
Creation. So, you know, I mean,
we'll come to you and I promise to ask about your own business
and your other practice, because of course, carnal was very much a seasonal thing.
But with your design, I've had on
your favourites, the ones of which you're most proud over the entire period.
What ones I've made?
You know, yes.
Yeah, you think that's Becky O'Hanlon's product.
Well, I think so.
You don't copyright it. I don't mind.
Oh, probably the rainbow section, because I'm known as the Rainbow Girl.
So I made my first backpack from scrap stage and showed me how to make the frame
and wrap it, make all the struts for it.
And yeah, it turned out kind of how I wanted it to.
And yeah, it was amazing.
Yeah, I felt really proud of that because from just making a little head
dress out of plastic to that, it was quite impressive.
Yeah, I learned a lot of new skills.
Yeah. Yeah, I think probably the rainbow section.
So that would be. And the fact that it worked on parade, because I mean, so,
you know, very easy to make a backpack.
There was only one really proofing the pudding, which is
how does the person wearing it and what does it look like two hours later
after it set off? Yeah, it was fine.
And it was it was totally, whoo.
Yeah. Beyond fit for purpose.
It was like, tick that box.
I think that's the trend.
Yeah. One of the years we had torrential rain as well.
So yeah, I lost it. So yeah, yeah.
You know, yes.
Torrential rain.
Oh, yes.
The two are often great.
You mentioned setting up your own business the rest of it.
Would you care to tell us a little bit?
About that, I mean, yeah, of course.
So that began 2010.
So I've been doing this for five and a half years now.
And they said it would never last.
Yeah, I still go in strong.
It's just about surviving.
So I teach some art workshops in schools.
But their funding is gets worse and worse every year.
But I always seem to manage and struggle through it.
So art workshops in schools, different community projects
with adults with learning difficulties,
a swicker, of course.
And then about two years ago, I'm like when it gets quite quiet
with my workshops and things, I thought, like, what am I going to do in my time?
I really like if I'm just sat at home, I can't do that.
So I like to be creative.
So I learned about two years ago, I learned to crochet,
which has become very.
Yeah, you know, you're ahead of the curve.
Yeah. You know, so alongside this, I've got my business called In Rainbow.
So make a lot of crochet things and sell things that there's got my online shop.
So that kind of keeps me going while the work kind of dries out.
So, yeah.
And I'm thinking I just see something recently on Facebook.
It's the the crocheted
taxidermy heads.
Taxidermy heads.
I'm sorry. That's so clever.
They're very witty, very witty.
Let me mind the the burgeoning market called again, you can't Facebook in
mail crocheted clothes.
I'm sure you see those pictures.
I'm not sure I'll be joining in that.
But yeah, yeah, not a look.
I'm going to be selling you unfortunately.
Sadly, of course,
Swickr Carnival heard the news from our soul
and remaining fund of the Arts Council of Wales
about almost two weeks ago now,
and they've withdrawn future revenue funding from Swickr,
which means that the company is set to close in the non too distant future.
This, of course, in turn means that
that the kind of carnival that you worked on this summer
will be the last for the foreseeable future.
I know you're sad.
I know we're all very sad.
What's your what are your thoughts on?
I mean, what has that's been?
Yeah, this summer.
Let's start there.
You know, this summer's carnival.
For my part, I'm more than happy to actually go on record
and say that the the the atmosphere,
the attention to detail, the the the care and love between artists
and the community and the resulting work that comes out of all that.
Yeah, why not?
I'm going to use the word love and soul and joy.
These are quite hard things to measure if you're out there
in the world of bean counting, but was of the highest possible order.
Yeah, it just seemed to me
a shining example of what happens when you,
you know, very dangerously throw your doors open and say to anybody
and everybody who wants to come to the door that you can fit in
and we can all get on together.
And the glue that's going to hold us together is is making things.
It's being creative.
You know, yes, I still associate the carnival count
with the smell of burning flesh, but that's glue gunning for you.
That was a joke. Thank you.
So from my perspective, I really feel and this is down to
the artists, you know, who were so much more than artists.
I mean, facilitators, artists, tutors.
None of those words have ever really animatars, another one
has ever really done justice to people who actually deliver
swickers vision and, you know, who have to hold it close to,
you know, long hours and the rest of it.
Either way, so the carnival camp this summer was, in my opinion,
you know, of the highest order.
And perhaps gets my medal of honour, which is it was
the happiest and most fruitful carnival camp, I think,
in 26 years of carnival.
So hang bang the gong for you and the team.
Yeah. What can you remember from this summer's
kind of carnival, carnival number 26 2015?
How was it for you?
Yeah, amazing again.
We were in Fitz Allen Primary School, no high school,
working in an amazing space, amazing team.
Yeah, again, the same groups coming back every year and new groups.
And participating in the carnival.
Just everyone was really enthusiastic, really nice atmosphere in the camp.
It wasn't. Yeah, really nice.
And lots of lovely designs as well.
People have drawn themselves on the team as well.
Yes, it's a mixture, isn't it?
There's lots of different points of entry, you know,
if somebody doesn't have an idea, you've generated ideas
of sections that they can come to and by coming to it, they fill them out.
I mean, literally, you know, you work with them.
And it wasn't enough space that we had to make.
No.
So yeah, space for everyone, which is always a great thing.
Yes, absolutely, absolutely.
And we had a sunny day on
which is which is great.
Well, yes, again, I'm elsewhere on the day,
so I don't get to enjoy the build up quite as much as I used to,
because now we've got our community stage
in the haze, putting on, gosh, I think it was 17 different acts.
So you're at the atrium, the University of South Wales
at the bottom of Churchill Road.
It's sunny day, nine, ten o'clock.
You've had your croissant?
Yeah, sitting on the grass, past season.
Sitting on the grass.
It's gone to the carnival.
Yes.
How was that build up?
I mean, what was it like putting it together on the day?
What was how was the parade for you?
Yeah, fantastic.
It was all went to plan.
All went to plan.
The line, because it's in such a small car park,
it's always quite easy to get everyone in line and stuff.
And it went off on time.
Far as I know, no costumes fell apart, which is good.
That's a baseline, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
A really good crowd as well.
Loads of people out, taking photos and just lovely comments.
Yeah, it was fantastic.
It was, yeah, yes.
More, yeah, on the one hand, as you say, nothing
completely trouble free, on the other hand,
exactly what an urban carnival parade should be about.
Yeah. You know.
Yeah. So top marks were all involved, particularly the people who,
well, just bring out the best in other people.
I mean, that seems to be your job. Yeah.
Yeah. Use the arts to bring the best out in everyone.
And yes, less of an arts organisation, more of a cult.
And unfortunately, as I was saying earlier,
the Arts Council of Wales have pulled the financial plug on the company
and we're set to close.
And with that, certainly the demise of Cardiff Carnival
is more than imminent.
Terribly sad, obviously.
What are your thoughts at this time?
Well, it's just really disappointing, to be honest.
Like there's nothing like it in Cardiff and such a big community project.
I just don't know how it can't be funded anymore.
I do know, but it's just disgusting, really.
I was something everyone's so passionate about and
just bring such a good community together for those three weeks.
You just have to be in the camp to see it, really.
Yeah, really sad.
Really sad.
I think you're quite right, which is ultimately, I think we both know if
those who, you know, who made those decisions actually knew more about the project
than I certainly have to have reflected twice.
But, you know, it's very much a participatory art project.
And it's like an iceberg.
I always tell people nine tenths of the work is not what you see on the day.
It's how we get to it.
It's a lead up to it. How we get there.
Look at the interaction between these fabulous carnival artists
and people of every shape or size, you know, queen class.
So, you know, they're all there.
So on a happier and permanent and for posterity, for perpetuity,
I hereby award you Becky Holmes, the Cardiff Carnival.
You are a hero, non-existent medal,
which I hope you will wear non-existently
with pride for the duration of your working life and beyond.
Becky Holmes, thank you very much indeed.